Questioner: What is... what is,
really, the purpose of life?
Could you offer some insight into this?
Thanks.
Sadhguru: Isn't it fantastic that
if there is no purpose,
you have nothing to accomplish,
you can simply live?
Huh?
No, but you want a purpose,
and not just any purpose,
you want a purpose given by God.
This is very dangerous.
People who believe they have a
God-given purpose are doing
the cruelest things on the planet.
Yes or no?
They are doing the most horrible things,
and they have always done
the most horrible things,
because when you have
a God-given purpose,
life here becomes less
important than your purpose.
No, life is important.
Life is important —
when I say "life,"
I'm not talking about
your family, your job, what
you do, what
you don't do, your parties, I
'm not talking about that as life.
This is life, isn't it?
Is life inside
you or all around you?
The environment of life—
you're confusing the
environment of life with life itself.
Your home, your family,
your workplace, your party—
all of these are the environments of life.
This isn't life, is it?
Yes or no?
You are confusing the
environment with reality.
No.
Life is important
because it's the only thing you know;
you don't know anything else.  Do
you know anything else?
The rest is all imagination, isn't it?
The only thing is that this one is pulsing,
alive, and that's all there is to it.
So, is this important?
It is extremely important.
Not you as a person,
that's not important,
but you as a part
of life is very important,
because that's the foundation of everything.
When I say that this is the basis of everything,
the universe exists for you only
because you exist, right?
Yes or no?
The world only exists for
you because you exist;
otherwise, it wouldn't
exist in your experience.
Therefore, in every sense,
this is important.
So, what is the purpose of this?
Look, if you had a
purpose and you fulfilled it,
what would you do after that?
After that, what would you do?
You'd get bored, wouldn't you?  The thing is,
life is so complex,
so phenomenally complex,
that if you spent 10,000 years
observing it carefully,
you still wouldn't
fully understand it.  Even
if you spent a million years
observing it with absolute focus,
you still wouldn't
know it completely.  That's just how
things are.
Is there a meaning to this?
The greatest thing in life is
that it has no meaning.
The greatest aspect of life
is that it has no meaning,
and there is no need for
it to have any meaning.
It is the smallness of the individual's mind
that will seek meaning,
because, psychologically, you will feel
somewhat disconnected from life
if you do not have a
purpose and a meaning.
People are constantly
trying to create these false purposes.
Now, they were doing very well and were happy.
Suddenly, they got married.
Now the focus is on the other person.
Then they have children.
Now they've become unhappy together.
"Now, the whole reason
I'm going through this unhappiness
is because of the children."
And so it goes.
These are things that you are causing
and maintaining as life purposes.  Is
there a purpose given by God?
What if God doesn't know you exist?
No, I'm just asking, by chance.
I'm saying that in this enormous cosmos,
of which God should be the Creator
and manager of these hundred billion galaxies,
and within them is this
small planet and you...
Suppose He doesn't know
you exist, what would happen?
Is it possible or not?
Excuse me, I'm
saying so many sacrilegious things,
but is it possible or not?
What if he doesn't even know you exist?
What if he doesn't have a plan for you?
Assume he doesn't have a plan,
an individual plan for you,
don't look for such things.
The point is that
creation is structured in such a way
that Creation and the Creator
cannot be separated.
Here, you are a part of creation.
At the same time, the source of
creation is pulsing within you.
If you pay a little
attention to this process of life,
you won't need any purpose.
He'll keep you hooked for a
million years, if you want.
There's so much going on, and by
"so much" I mean
so many unbelievable things
happening right here.
If you pay enough attention,
a million years of existence
will keep you busy, or more.
At this moment, the need
for a purpose has arisen
because you are stuck
in the psychological structure,
not in your life process.
Psychologically,
her psychological structure
functions based on the
limited data she has accumulated.  That's what
she's
spinning around in, and right now,
her thoughts and emotions have become
far more important than her life.
Isn't that right?
So, because of that, you search for
a purpose as an escape from the trap
you've set for yourself.
It's a trap you set.
You can easily get out of it.
If the trap was set for
you by someone else, it will be difficult to get out
because they will set a trap in
such a way that you won't be able to escape, right?
I'm talking about
life, not marriage; that's what I
'm talking about.  And
that.
So, this is a
trap you set yourself.
It's easy to get out of it,
but that's the problem.
The reason it's so difficult is because,
now, you're
identified with the trap,
you like it.
You like her because she
gives you a certain sense of
security, stability,
protection, and individual identity.
If you build a cocoon around yourself,
it gives you security,
but it also imprisons you.
Walls of self-preservation
are also walls of self-imprisonment.
When they protect you,
you like them.
When they restrict you,
you don't like them.  That's why
we have doors.
We like walls
because they protect us,
but we have doors so we can
open them and go out whenever we want.
No matter how good it is, we
still want to go out, don't we?
So, that's how it is with every
trap you set.
No matter how good it is,
you still want to go out.
Therefore, the psychological wall
that you have built,
which gives you some sense of identity,
which gives you some sense of being a person,
an individual,
and which gives you security,
you begin to experience it
as a trap;
At some point you want to knock him down.
Therefore, one way to avoid breaking it
is to find a purpose for it.
Those who find
purpose in their lives
become so convinced.
They will live forever trapped
within their own framework,
believing they are doing
the most fantastic thing.
The first thing
you need is balance.
If you have balance,
then you can climb.
If you don't have balance, you
'd better stay on the ground, wouldn't you?  It
is not safe for someone who
is not balanced to climb high.
You'd better stay close to the ground.
You shouldn't climb.
Therefore, the first thing
is to establish a balance,
then dismantle your
psychological structure, and
then it will be a wonderful thing.
If you dismantle your
unbalanced psychological structure—
which many people do nowadays;
Look, why would someone want to
drink alcohol or use drugs?
Because it breaks down
your psychological structure
and makes you feel free for a moment;
But without the necessary balance,
you haven't worked towards balance,
but you have achieved freedom.
Freedom without balance
is destruction, isn't it?
Therefore, the first thing
is to work towards balance,
a tremendous sense of equilibrium,
in which even if you
dismantle your psychological structure,
you can simply live here.
Dismantling your
psychological structure is an important process
because it's your trap,
your security, your
stability, and
at the same time it's your trap,
because the walls have been erected,
you feel safe,
but they are also your trap.
If you dismantle your trap,
you'll dismantle your
security as well, won't you?
You also dismantle
your sense of purpose.
You also dismantle everything
that is important to you.
Therefore, to achieve this,
you will need balance.
Without balance, if you fall apart,
you'll go crazy.
But don't look for a purpose,
because if you look for a purpose,
you're looking for madness.
If you find one,
you're definitely crazy.
Yes.
If you think you've found
a purpose in life,
you've definitely gone mad,
because only
mad people have a purpose,
or people who have a purpose
are mad in many ways.
These are things you create in your mind
and believe to be
true, right?  Right
now,
"fighting for my country is my purpose," and
if necessary, I will fight,
knowing full well that it's
a damn unnecessary fight.
Yes.
That way, you'll only fight
to the extent necessary.
If you think that's your purpose,
you'll want to destroy the whole world
because of the nonsense
you believe, won't you?
If something is necessary,
we will do it,
with absolute commitment.  There
is no other purpose.
The purpose of life is to
live, and to live fully.
Living life to the fullest doesn't mean
partying every night.  To
live life fully means
that, before you die,
every aspect of life has been explored,
nothing has been left unexplored.
Yes?
Before you die,
even if you don't explore the cosmos,
at least you should experience this part of life
in its entirety.
This is something you have to
do for yourself, isn't it?
That's what it means to live fully,
to experience all of this,
all the dimensions of what this is.
You left nothing untouched.
Just do that.  It
will take a long time.
It's a good enough purpose for you.